---
layout: default
title: Teaching How to change the World
parent: Getting it right
nav_order: 15
---

# Teaching How to change the World

Virtually all scientists come from academic institutions, such as Universities. However, most universities only train research scientists, with little space for non-research career paths, this is specially the case for “pure sciences” like Physics, Biology, Chemistry or Math. Usually there are a few sessions about other careers, programs to transfer into other degrees such as journalism or teaching, but usually this is the exception, rather than a possible option. Most scientists we can identify today as impact scientists, are more the result of a path that started in Universities, perhaps includes some graduate or postgraduate experience, but then felt their path was not leading in the right direction of impact, so they had to steer off into the unknown. It often includes a phase of uncertainty or reconversion, and definitely was not something recommended when studying. Thankfully this is changing. This change was probably helped both by the “Data Science” revolution, but also the millennial generation, known for being specially minded about social impact , getting to university age. This section explores some of these efforts from the educational space to create the profile of a scientist much closer to impact, not only focused on research or academia.

One of the most prominent examples of educational efforts is precisely the class where Jane Chane started working on the Embrace company we wrote about on the last chapter. At Stanford, the University where it happens, it is called the “D School”, or “Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford University”. Besides fostering the creation of the Embrace solutions Jane did, they are also known for the creation of “d.light”, a company that creates a very low-cost solar-powered artificial lights. This company started in 2006, the year before Jane took the class. By 2017 they had “sold close to twenty million solar light and power products in 62 countries, improving the lives of over 82 million people”, according to their website.

“D School” has become a hugely demanded class in Stanford. Increasingly globally minded students, also knowledgeable in complex science and technology skills, look to make a difference in the world. They are aware of the potential they might be able to have, but feel unable to connect their skills with these multi-dimensional complex challenges. The process in this class, as described by David Kelly in a 2013 New York Times profile , is first to boost their “creative confidence”, so that they are aware of this potential. They then learn “ideation processes”, were rapid prototyping and user feedback become key strategies to incorporate their scientific and technical skills into this creative confidence.

Another of such places catering this Impact Science demand is a class called “How to change the world”, at the University College in London´s Department of Science, Technology, Engineering and Public Policy. This class happens once a year and lasts for two weeks. In 2017, when I met its director Dr. Jason Blackstock, it attracted 700 students across the Sciences, Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Science, … They are all met by 65 experts from the public and private sector, and presented with global challenges, such as safe water drinking in refugee camps, or reducing carbon dependence in everyday products . The first week is structured to push them from the overall context of the challenge towards a concrete part they are uniquely positioned to make an impact, gathering in groups with different skills; which might include partnering with external experts. The design of this classes favors groups with a wide range of skills and experiences, and with a clear goal. In the end, not only they experience the process of realizing the value of the scientific and technical skills, but also how hard it is to integrate this into the complex reality of global challenges, with their political, cultural, or strategic dimensions. The underlying strategy of the University is to foster impact by easing the links and partnership building skills of students between academia, policy-making, and industry.

As hinted by the example of these two schools, every year there is more attention to widen the mindset of how science influences society. Obviously via academia and research, but there is much more space to drive positive impact in the world with scientists. One way of looking the difference between academia or research, and impact science is to see the focus of these new schools on “pulling” from the specific impact they seek to have, rather than “pushing” academically trained scientists or academic knowledge into impact. One of the key differences is that when you push, you need to know more less which direction and what knowledge you are going to be pushing. When you pull, the goal is much clear by definition, and it is much easier to explore and guide what is it you need to consider or incorporate to get the solution. You could push the knowledge of new lithium batteries into climate change, and we should. You can also think of energy use and seek how pull solutions, either be new batteries, consumption incentives, or work with biggest consumers. Be tend to think of, and train for, scientists and their skills in the first case, but not so much for the second case, even when their skills are equally applicable.


{% include more.md %}
