---
layout: default
title: The witness paradox of climate change
parent: Missing the point
nav_order: 7
---

# The witness paradox of climate change

Climate change is another of these long-called failures, or as Michele Wucker called it, “Grey Rhinos ” cases. Everyone knows how a grey rhino looks like. This one is even charging at you with known consequences of inaction, but we see it coming and do nothing, as we keep seeing it coming. It is a case where the scientific emphasis is mostly siloed on understanding the processes, without having it turned into meaningful change in practice. At this point, there is no reasonable doubt that human activity is pumping out greenhouse gases, like CO2, are disrupting the climate systems at a global scale. This disruption has negative effects in the landscape, the oceans, life in general, and our society and support systems like agriculture. The frequency and intensity, and costs, of extreme events, like floods and droughts, have increased and will continue to. The average temperatures in the surface will keep rising, putting more stress in our health, food production, livelihoods and lives. Eventually this stressed system might pass a threshold of no return, deemed at around 2 degrees Celsius of warming above the Industrial revolution time. At this stage, instead of adjusting by being warmer, the whole climate system changes and the impacts are not anymore incremental but radical. We can measure this, we can understand how and where these changes will happen. We know where these gases come from. We can even model the effects of having more gases. As the scientific community has put forward, if we want to minimize the consequences we must, right now, massively reduce our CO2 emission (it’s too late to avoid repercussions completely, we can only reduce the impact).
The strategy of reducing the emissions is called “climate change mitigation”. There is also a parallel track, called “climate change adaptation” which is to accommodate for the climatic changes we already see, and the ones will likely see incoming. Climate change adaptation is, in fact, increasingly important as we prove unable to mitigate. The key concepts here are that we understand that climate change is caused by humans, and that we can probably stop it with mitigation, and in any case some degree of adaptation is needed. Adaptation is also increasingly more expensive as we fail to mitigate.

Through the discovery and popularization of climate change, mitigation has been the first priority, while adaptation was mostly being seen as measure of dealing with the failure. Al Gore, on his 1992 book “Earth in the Balance” called adaptation as a "kind of laziness, an arrogant faith in our ability to react in time to save our skins". On top of that, the private sector has always been seen as the culprit of climate change, the target of those demands to stop pollution. As if it were an external entity just pumping out gases, deaf to science. The scientific community in those early days was essentially dedicated to explaining with ever increasing detail the processes of how the private sector is putting us into deeper trouble, how we ought to stop pollution immediately, and how not even adaptation would work. Adaptation was like a person buying bigger clothes as they failed to mitigate eating more cakes. And we kept emitting more, and the effects of the climate change took its toll on more land degradation, less agricultural crops, more disasters, ... In fact affecting most those who were most vulnerable in developing countries, that also were emitting least. A double injustice. And we kept writing papers. Scientific careers fully dedicated dissecting these destruction processes. Whole UN bodies to make crystal clear what was the Science and how proven it was. From the individual and research community perspective, scientists were achieving their objective, peer-reviewed papers, citations, tenure, increased basis for their claims and cries... From the global perspective, the world kept mostly on the so-called “Business as usual”, and we still are, flying towards the finely calculated, and quickly approaching, threshold of 2C degrees above which things will get disproportionately worse.

In early 2010, as the evidence of climate change mounted, an increasing group of people started calling for addressing the role of the private sector beyond an easy blame of being the source of the devil pumping of CO2. Yes, the private sector is responsible for most of the emissions , but virtually every gram of it is a service or a product that is sold, it represents the employment of millions of people, the very fuel that powers our increasing well-being society. As much as it is vilified, we need it to produce our food, move things and people back and forth, even fly to the conferences we talk about how much CO2 that is. As part of our social fabric of wellbeing, we simply cannot shut down today all factories, ground planes and close mines, as the science shows we physically need to if we want to abate climate change. Furthermore, if given the choice of the same product, or service, at a higher price in return for a less environmental footprint, most of us won’t want to pay, or can afford, the extra premium cost, like when given the choice of an ecological fruit versus a standard one. And the opposite is true, wealthier people and societies that could afford paying more to have a similar but more sustainable lifestyle, have lifestyles that instead pollute more, like when buying an extra car for convenience, instead of pushing for better public transport.
As much as it pains to realize this, currently our socioeconomic status is substantially coupled to environmental unsustainability. Decoupling this will need much more than papers, or books, saying that much. Part of it is collective behavior, habit inertia and lack of incentives to change. Just like most of us don’t really change our behavior after our dentist tell us to flush more, our doctor to eat less fat, or our bank to put more into our savings account. Climate change is not a political priority as it is not something that will make people change their vote on an election. On the contrary, the candidate who promises less subsidies to oil, or more taxes to offset carbon will probably lose votes, especially from those who would lose their jobs. But even more difficult, many people simply cannot afford to buy the more expensive healthier food or cannot afford not to upgrade their old, and oil thirsty, car to go to work.

The private sector and adaptation, a historical double devil, could in fact play a substantial role on finding its own double positive role. They could cover most of the finance, either by protecting their own assets or supply chains that in the future would suffer. If chocolate beans don't grow, there is no chocolate industry. Additionally, private finance has a designed capacity and expertise balancing risks and investments, and thus would tend to put venture capital in the emerging markets of climate resilient products and services. There is a solid strategic angle to engage and articulate in detail the relation of private sector and adaptation to climate change, not only to start discovering solutions, but also as we aim to shift or replace several pillars of society, and many livelihoods. Of course, as a parallel track of mitigation efforts. Today this is part of the common narrative. Today, there are many efforts, articulated strategies and dedicated funds on both the mitigation side, and on the adaptation side, and also engaging the Private sector as key partners. But back in the 2010s the private sector and adaptation were mostly two big taboos, especially in scientific debates. I remember attending the private sector side-event at one of the UN key conferences on climate change, “COP 17” in Durban, South Africa. The keynote speaker at a session, CEO from a multinational, said that “we are not here to ‘pay the bill’ of climate change, we are here to work together on pragmatic solutions we can start implementing now”. These were also the pillars of the “Global Adaptation Institute”, or GAIN, the NGO where I landed in 2011, right after dropping my very academic postdoc.




{% include more.md %}
