---
layout: default
title: How do we get there, Handbook for Scientists and Managers
has_children: true
nav_order: 16
---

# How do we get there, Handbook for Scientists and Managers

Getting a grasp of the concept of _impact science_ has personally been a long path. When I left academia, it was a difficult choice, and remained for many years a challenging time of uncertainty whether I had done the right thing or not. Looking back at those times I wish I knew that there is a professionally viable, market-growing, and extremely interesting world of science outside academia. I wish I knew leaving academia doesn´t mean giving up the 'top choice' or that doing so did not mean that I was not good enough. I felt, and was told by a famous political scientist, that society had 'invested in me' with a lot of specialized education and I was not using it as I should. That from a public policy sense, I was a wasted investment. Beyond that, I had no idea what else I could do, where to do it, or how to make that transition happen. This made me feel anxious and frustrated. Moreover, the longer a scientist remains in academia, the harder this transition is. The cost of facing uncertain rules of your professional value or losing the status one has achieved despite the hardships of academia. These can be very hard moments. I can count more than a handful of known colleagues who once were good or really good academics, and faced with this change, they turned into a spiral of medicated depressions, clinical anxiety, unmet expectations and the more severe cases periods of professional help at mental health institutions or even struggling with suicidal thoughts. So deep is the way that academia defines success as a scientist. I have since discovered a lot of people craved and found other ways to be a successful scientist by being what we would call _impact scientists_.

There are two main reasons I wrote this book. One is that I believe impact science is a new concept that is both needed and unknown, perhaps even undefined. Many stories show this trend. On both sides, when it is needed and successfully used, and when it could have been used and didn't, or it failed when applied. That is the first part of this book, up to this chapter. The second reason for writing this book is that I wish I had done this back when I left academia. This last section of the book is meant for all those who have an academic background but feel something is missing. They still want to be scientists, but haven't yet found their niche. Or their friends and family who want to understand the reason, and path, for such an uncommon and dramatic change from a 'normal' scientist. These impact scientists wish to engage more with the world beyond academic articles or public outreach articles. They are tired of the pressures and uncertainties of the academic life and cycle of temporal postdocs, moving countries every two years or so, but they truly don´t know how to even think of alternatives. This chapter builds in a good part on my own experience and motivations, but it also includes the external perspectives from each of my bosses and managers since I left academia. I traveled to sit down with each of my bosses years after we worked together: at my last academic postdoc, the CEOs of the NGOs and the startups I worked at, and my World Bank manager. I wanted to understand what they saw different in my profile or attitude. If this is a typical transition from academia to impact science, I´m trying to understand what is different, and what was good and what was bad at each step. To accumulate more than my anecdotal evidence, I have also travelled the world for two years to more than twenty countries testing my hypothesis of impact science as a consultant, and to interview academics, employees, managers, investors, and politicians that are, or work with, academics that have left academia, or wanted to. It also draws from the feedback of talks and events I´ve helped with this thinking about impact scientist as a career choice, including a session at my PhD institution on the ten-year anniversary of finishing; and mentees I have helped throughout these years. Lastly, I have been very deliberate in seeking continuous feedback on this book from the earliest drafts. I have registered and integrated all of this feedback and continue to do so through its website. Feedback from readers is always welcome. In fact, this book is meant to be updated regularly, so make sure to check online for the latest version.

{% include more.md %}
