---
layout: default
title: Introduction
nav_order: 3
---

# Introduction

Facts don’t change the World, people do. We are creating a world dominated more and more by data and technology, and where fewer and fewer know how to use it. Companies sit on top of vast amounts of data. And so do governments, NGOs or academia. But it is not the data, is what we do with it.

Historically, we started having scientists seeking and producing most of the data, to do research, to publish papers, to Understand. Understanding has been the core of the Scientific revolution. Guided by the “free play of the free intellect”. Roughly a decade ago, the Private Sector, especially in Silicon Valley, wanted help making Decisions, more than it wanted understanding and research papers. It wanted, for example, to put thousands of small variations of websites to millions of people, and see what combinations work. They were not really interested in Understanding why a particular option worked, but on optimizing. On profiling customers. This is why a new breed of Scientist, experts in processing data, was born: the Data Scientists. We could not have enough, so more and more people became Data Scientists. Today Data Science is one of the most demanded, and rapidly evolving job markets. Yet, it has no formal training, curricula or even agreed definition. The skills and tools of this job, heavily subsidized by the private sector´s thirst for more results, and the fast cadence of technology, are creating ever better, more complex and powerful tools.

An increasing number of people start to see the problem with this trend focusing on better decisions by mostly getting more data and data-driven decisions. Before, we had scientists in knowledge silos, working in creating better skills and tools in their quest for understanding. Now we have Data Scientists, creating even better skills and tools in Decision Making. But Data will tell us that certain genetic mutation in your genes predicts more health care complications and extra cost, but moral, and history, warn us against selectively and genetically breed and optimize our kids. Data tells us a robot can perform heart surgery more accurately than a person, but few would allow being operated only by autonomous robots. Because data is what scientists are trained to manage and understand, and data is what we have exponentially more of, there is an increasing potential, and responsibility, for scientists to both step in, and step out. Step in, to engage not only in Academics, but also on the consequences and actions. Step out, to incorporate and work with experts in other fields and in other realities. For far too long scientist have built ivory towers where they live in their segmented field of expertise.

### For whom is this book for?

In this book I argue that Science is not about papers, or even understanding, science is about gathering understanding in order to improve as humans, as societies. We have been increasingly obsessed with the what, or the why of things, but not the so what. This book argues, using stories and examples rather than theory, about this forgotten space of Science in a world increasingly dominated and driven by data and technology. It is aimed for anyone who seek not only answers, but real impact from science. Anyone how is curious about the world, but also seek to connect this curiosity with the complicated distance between understanding and the real word. This book is also directed to scientists who want to round up their skills to be more effective outside of academia or research. It argues for creating a bigger supply of Impact Scientists. Lastly, and perhaps more importantly, it also argues for creating a bigger demand for those Impact Scientists. This book is therefore aimed also for business executives, managers, and hiring professionals in the private sector, as well as public officials, chiefs of staff and politicians who struggle with hiring and managing scientists for fear they are stuck exclusively into research, or have a harder time aligning their scientific skills for the mandate of the company, or the messy reality of governance and making public policy.

## What Bhutan Nuts and NASA rockets have in common

In the spring of 2017, I was living in Bhutan, a small remote country enclaved between two giants, China and India. I remember traveling from the closest airport, in Jakar, to the village I was living, Lignmethan. It is an entire day driving up and down, valleys and mountains passes, through the “highway” -- a mostly unpaved two-lane road with no markings, largely no safety rails on the sides, and boulders and road bumps requiring excellent driving skills to navigate. It is such an incredibly beautiful landscape, and literally one of the most remote places on earth, due to limited visa permits and long travel times.
I was working for a hazelnut company ("Mountain Hazelnuts"), a for-profit fully foreign-invested social enterprise that provides small trees at no cost to thousands of low-income farmers to more than double their income reliably for years selling back to the company their harvest, while protecting land from erosion. The company is based on the “triple bottom line ” model of sustainability: for social cause, for profit and for the environment. It is also a company that loves data, and measures everything. I was with the company for a few months helping to figure out their logistics for the collection of initial harvests from millions of young hazelnut trees, scattered across the country along those infinite roads. I remember being struck by the gorgeous view of the natural landscape, by moments of awe for the beauty and privilege to be there. At the same time, I wondered to myself if it made any sense for an astrophysicist like myself to be doing this type of work.
	I had studied solar physics, completed a doctorate degree looking at and trying to explain magnetoacoustic plasma waves. Following that, I had worked with NASA rockets and satellite missions. My life had not involved many hazelnuts, besides eating them with complete disregard for the paradises they might have come from. Neither was I an expert in logistics, or even in Bhutan. I would have needed some time to locate the country on a map just a few months before.

  {% include more.md %}
