---
layout: default
title: When we look away, the AIDS case
parent: Missing the point
nav_order: 5
---

# When we look away, the AIDS case

How many people need to die before we understand that facts are not enough? One? Ten? A thousand? This is a blunt question to draw attention to the failure in facts alone, even when lives are at stake. Understanding something is, at best, a step in the right direction, but then we must see how to use that advantage point to actually solve the issue. For example, when there is an accident in aviation, there’s a committee that investigates to understand how it happened. They spend a great deal of time, using many scientific, technological, mathematical, and engineering tools to precisely understand how the failure. Once the process ends, they have the facts. Once those are clear, there is another process that ensures it will not happen again. Protocols are changed, new safety harnesses are implemented, policies are changed, ... As a result, it is rare to see the same type of failure happen again. Air travel gets safer, and we move on with better systems and machines.

The appearance of the HIV, and AIDS, in the USA offers a painful case where we were unable to link facts with action. Where what we called Science painfully proved to be not enough. Where our Science ecosystem proved clumsy and ill-judged to get to the understanding phase, much less to leverage that understanding to save lives across the world.

Even today, how much does the average person know about the disease? HIV, or human immunodeficiency virus, attacks the body’s immune system, eventually destroying its defense mechanisms against even minor infections. This health condition is still seen with stigma by many, associated perhaps with risky or immoral behavior. There is also misunderstanding about its transmission. Today, while there is no cure, through consistent and sustained treatment, a person living with HIV can achieve a level of virus in their body that is undetectable by most standardized blood tests. At this point, it becomes virtually impossible to spread the virus and an individual can reach a life expectancy approaching that of the general population. When left untreated, the HIV infection can lead to “AIDS” disease, or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, which is fatal.

HIV is now known to have come from Africa, probably around present-day Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo. It was probably the combination of the colonialism that brought development and an influx of foreign workers. Prostitution and sexually transmitted diseases helped transmit the original infection around the 1920s, probably from the bite, or meat, of a simian infected with the virus where HIV mutated from. With a long incubation period of a decade, and during which one can transmit the disease, the virus silently spread below the medical radar for years. It is suspected to have traveled far via expat workers. For example, it probably arrived in Haiti around 1966 or earlier. In Norway, in 1976 a sailor, his wife and one of his daughter died from HIV he contracted while sailing in Africa years prior. In 1977 a Danish physician died from AIDS after having worked in Zaire for years.

On the early decades, HIV hit most sub-Saharan Africa, but the USA in particular saw a rapid growth and spread, particularly among homosexuals. There are several hypotheses for this. Some factors include that Port o Prince, the capital of Haiti, was a popular cruise gay destination for Americans. Studies of those times estimate several factors conflating on the spread of this epidemia in the gay community: an average of twelve different sexual partners per person per year, the high rate of infection with gay sex, and the coincidence with a nascent liberation and concentration of gays communities especially in San Francisco and New York. Intravenous drug users were also hit hard with a high rate of infection by the practice of sharing needles. Many European countries had public health policies such as programs to offer needle exchanges, while the USA mostly deferred action or acknowledge awareness . Eventually the general population outside these high-risk were affected. Mothers passed HIV to their babies, the blood bank supply -without capacity to detect the problem- got infected from affected donors, and then passed it on to people that underwent medical operations. Hemophiliacs, people with limited ability to stop bleeding when cut, were a special case. At the time, a new life-saving product, Factor VIII, was invented by which they could have almost normal lives if they received regular transfusions. This Factor VIII was produced from donor blood. People with HIV that donated blood contaminated the doses for several people´s worth of Factor VIII. 10.000 people are estimated to have received HIV from this source alone .	 

Unfortunately, it took many years to acknowledge the nature of the pandemia, to discover the virus, and to develop the type of lifesaving treatment individuals living with HIV have today. When the virus appeared in the United States during the early 80s, it was not well understood and was dubbed the “gay plague,” as the homosexual community was seeing first the most cases. With rampant social stigma and discrimination against the homosexuals, the matter was not taken seriously.

 The purposeful avoidance of a focus to find a treatment for the devastating illness may have hindered understanding on how it spread. It shouldn’t have taken so long. As early as 1982, researchers knew there was something in the blood bank supply that was causing individuals to acquire AIDS later. Early that year, the CDC,  Center for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia (the highest U.S. public health authority) had the facts: AIDS was a mortal disease that was spreading at alarming rates and had been proven to be transmitted through blood and sexual contact, including via products for hemophiliacs.
Unfortunately, 1982 is also the same year a now infamous recording at a White House press briefing. President Ronald Reagan’s Press Secretary Larry Speakes mocked a journalist for being interested in how the White House was addressing the spread of the then dubbed “gay cancer” or “gay plague” .”. At the time, the disease was seen as a joke to those in power, who threw innuendos and insults at the problem. And so, for several years, HIV remained mostly unspoken, unaddressed. Discrimination won out. Bureaucratic and political red tape, and economic interests trumped public safety, while jokes were made at the highest policy levels. Research funds and scientists were disincentivized from dedicating themselves to this taboo topic.   New cases were mounting at exponential rates, and now via blood transfusions to the general population from infected donors. Then, it became more broadly known as an important public health issue, since it was affecting a wider population. The public stance changed, but no new funding was made available.
In 1985 the director of the CDC laboratory dedicated to this new epidemic, Don Francis, drafted the first plan. Don is an epidemiologist who had worked on containing the cholera epidemic in Nigeria in the early 1970s, the smallpox epidemic in Yugoslavia in 1972, and the 1976 Ebola epidemic in Sudan. He understood the severity of the situation and the expensive cost of a program that could work to prevent even more deaths. Also the even higher cost, economically and in lives lost, of not addressing the epidemia with full force. This proposal, called “Operation AIDS Control” asked for $40 million per year ($95 million in 2018 adjusted for inflation), educational programs for gays on safe sexual relations, for drug users on safer practices, clinics, research, and an unequivocal political public acceptance of the crisis. Not only it got denied, but the response was to “look pretty and do as little as you can”.  In fact, Don´s boos, the Director of the CDC and medical Dr. James Mason, was part of an Administration than wanted as little new funding and talks about the gay disease as possible. Years later, in 1992, at a conference where Mason was defending from criticism by experts that the government´s AIDS campaign was too vague and ineffective, he also stated that “there are certain areas which, when the goals of science collide with moral and ethical judgment, science has to take a timeout”. Before joining CDC, from 1970 to 1975, Mason had been the director of the hospital services of the Mormon church, whose faith forbids same-sex sexual behavior. After CDC Mason, from 1994 to 200, served at the general authority of the Mormon church, the “Second Quorum of the Seventy”. It is fair to say that Dr. Mason had pressures from many sides. From the Administration he believed in, from his culture and faith, and from his scientific and operational training in public health.  


{% include more.md %}
